\input texinfo
@settitle "Rspamd Spam Filtering System"
@titlepage

@title Rspamd Spam Filtering System
@subtitle A User's Guide for Rspamd

@author Vsevolod Stakhov


@end titlepage
@contents

@chapter Rspamd purposes and features.

@section Introduction.
Rspamd filtering system is created as a replacement of popular
@code{spamassassin}
spamd and is designed to be fast, modular and easily extendable system. Rspamd
core is written in @code{C} language using event driven paradigma. Plugins for rspamd
can be written in @code{lua}. Rspamd is designed to process connections
completely asynchronous and do not block anywhere in code. Spam filtering system
contains of several processes among them are:
@itemize @bullet
@item Main process
@item Workers processes
@item Controller process
@item Other processes
@end itemize
Main process manages all other processes, accepting signals from OS (for example
SIGHUP) and spawn all types of processes if any of them die. Workers processes
do all tasks for filtering e-mail (or HTML messages in case of using rspamd as
non-MIME filter). Controller process is designed to manage rspamd itself (for
example get statistics or learning rspamd). Other processes can do different
jobs among them now are implemented @code{LMTP} worker that implements
@code{LMTP} protocol for filtering mail and fuzzy hashes storage server. 

@section Features.
The main features of rspamd are:
@itemize @bullet
@item Completely asynchronous filtering that allows a big number of simultenious
connections.
@item Easily extendable architecture that can be extended by plugins written in
@code{lua} and by dynamicaly loaded plugins written in @code{c}.
@item Ability to work in cluster: rspamd is able to perform statfiles
synchronization, dynamic load of lists via HTTP, to use distributed fuzzy hashes
storage.
@item Advanced statistics: rspamd now is shipped with winnow-osb classifier that
provides more accurate statistics than traditional bayesian algorithms based on
single words.
@item Internal optimizer: rspamd first of all try to check rules that were met
more often, so for huge spam storms it works very fast as it just checks only
that rules that @emph{can} happen and skip all others.
@item Ability to manage the whole cluster by using controller process.
@item Compatibility with existing @code{spamassassin} SPAMC protocol.
@item Extended @code{RSPAMC} protocol that allows to pass many additional data
from SMTP dialog to rspamd filter.
@item Internal support of IMAP in rspamc client for automated learning.
@item Internal support of many anti-spam technologies, among them are
@code{SPF} and @code{SURBL}.
@item Active support and development of new features.
@end itemize

@chapter Installation of rspamd.

@section Obtaining of rspamd.

The main rspamd site is @url{http://rspamd.sourceforge.net/, sourceforge}. Here
you can obtain source code package as well as pre-packed packages for different
operating systems and architectures. Also, you can use SCM
@url{http://mercurial.selenic.com, mercurial} for accessing rspamd development
repository that can be found here:
@url{http://rspamd.hg.sourceforge.net:8000/hgroot/rspamd/rspamd}. Rspamd is
shipped with all modules and sample config by default. But there are some
requirements for building and running rspamd.

@section Requirements.

For building rspamd from sources you need @code{CMake} system. CMake is very
nice source building system and I decided to use it instead of GNU autotools.
CMake can be obtained here: @url{http://cmake.org}. Also rspamd uses gmime and
glib for MIME parsing and many other purposes (note that you are NOT required
to install any GUI libraries -  nor glib, nor gmime are GUI libraries). Gmime
and glib can be obtained from gnome site: @url{http://ftp.gnome.org/}. For
plugins and configuration system you also need lua language interpreter and
libraries. They can be easily obtained from @url{http://lua.org, official lua
site}. Also for rspamc client you need @code{perl} interpreter that could be
installed from @url{http://www.perl.org}.

@section Building and Installation.

Build process of rspamd is rather simple:
@itemize @bullet
@item Configure rspamd build environment, using cmake:
@example
$ cmake .
...
-- Configuring done
-- Generating done
-- Build files have been written to: /home/cebka/rspamd
@end example
@noindent
For special configuring options you can use
@example
$ ccmake .
 CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE                                                                                                                                           
 CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX             /usr/local                                                                                                                
 DEBUG_MODE                       ON                                                                                                                        
 ENABLE_GPERF_TOOLS               OFF                                                                                                                       
 ENABLE_OPTIMIZATION              OFF                                                                                                                       
 ENABLE_PERL                      OFF                                                                                                                       
 ENABLE_PROFILING                 OFF                                                                                                                       
 ENABLE_REDIRECTOR                OFF                                                                                                                       
 ENABLE_STATIC                    OFF                                                                                                                       
@end example
@noindent
Options allows building rspamd as static module (note that in this case
dynamicaly loaded plugins are @strong{NOT} supported), linking rspamd with
google performance tools for benchmarking and include some other flags while
building.
@item Build rspamd sources:
@example
$ make
[  6%] Built target rspamd_lua
[ 11%] Built target rspamd_json
[ 12%] Built target rspamd_evdns
[ 12%] Built target perlmodule
[ 58%] Built target rspamd
[ 76%] Built target test/rspamd-test
[ 85%] Built target utils/expression-parser
[ 94%] Built target utils/url-extracter
[ 97%] Built target rspamd_ipmark
[100%] Built target rspamd_regmark
@end example
@noindent
@item Install rspamd (as superuser):
@example
# make install
Install the project...
...
@end example
@noindent
@end itemize

After installation you would have several new files installed:
@itemize @bullet

@item Binaries:
@itemize @bullet
@item PREFIX/bin/rspamd - main rspamd executable
@item PREFIX/bin/rspamc - rspamd client program
@end itemize
@item Sample configuration files and rules:
@itemize @bullet
@item PREFIX/etc/rspamd.xml.sample - sample main config file
@item PREFIX/etc/rspamd/lua/*.lua - rspamd rules
@end itemize
@item Lua plugins:
@itemize @bullet
@item PREFIX/etc/rspamd/plugins/lua/*.lua - lua plugins
@end itemize

@end itemize
For @code{FreeBSD} system there also would be start script for running rspamd in
@emph{PREFIX/etc/rc.d/rspamd.sh}.

@section Running rspamd.

Rspamd can be started by running main rspamd executable -
@code{PREFIX/bin/rspamd}. There are several command-line options that can be
passed to rspamd. All of them can be displayed by passing --help argument:
@example
$ rspamd --help
Usage:
  rspamd [OPTION...] - run rspamd daemon

Summary:
  Rspamd daemon version 0.3.0

Help Options:
  -?, --help               Show help options

Application Options:
  -t, --config-test        Do config test and exit
  -f, --no-fork            Do not daemonize main process
  -c, --config             Specify config file
  -u, --user               User to run rspamd as
  -g, --group              Group to run rspamd as
  -p, --pid                Path to pidfile
  -V, --dump-vars          Print all rspamd variables and exit
  -C, --dump-cache         Dump symbols cache stats and exit
  -X, --convert-config     Convert old style of config to xml one
@end example
@noindent

All options are optional: by default rspamd would try to read
@code{PREFIX/etc/rspamd.xml} config file and run as daemon. Also there is test
mode that can be turned on by passing @option{-t} argument. In test mode rspamd
would read config file and checks its syntax, if config file is OK, then exit
code is zero and non zero otherwise. Test mode is useful for testing new config
file without restarting of rspamd. With @option{-C} and @option{-V} arguments it is
possible to dump variables or symbols cache data. The last ability can be used
for determining which symbols are most often, which are most slow and to watch
to real order of rules inside rspamd. @option{-X} option can be used to convert
old style (pre 0.3.0) config to xml one:
@example
$ rspamd -c ./rspamd.conf -X ./rspamd.xml
@end example
@noindent
After this command new xml config would be dumped to rspamd.xml file.

@section Managing rspamd with signals.
First of all it is important to note that all user's signals should be sent to
rspamd main process and not to its children (as for child processes these
signals may have other meanings). To determine which process is main you can use
two ways:
@itemize @bullet
@item by reading pidfile:
@example
$ cat pidfile
@end example
@noindent
@item by getting process info:
@example
$ ps auxwww | grep rspamd
nobody 28378  0.0  0.2 49744  9424   rspamd: main process (rspamd)
nobody 64082  0.0  0.2 50784  9520   rspamd: worker process (rspamd)
nobody 64083  0.0  0.3 51792 11036   rspamd: worker process (rspamd)
nobody 64084  0.0  2.7 158288 114200 rspamd: controller process (rspamd)
nobody 64085  0.0  1.8 116304 75228  rspamd: fuzzy storage (rspamd)

$ ps auxwww | grep rspamd | grep main
nobody 28378  0.0  0.2 49744  9424   rspamd: main process (rspamd)
@end example
@noindent
@end itemize

After getting pid of main process it is possible to manage rspamd with signals:
@itemize @bullet
@item SIGHUP - restart rspamd: reread config file, start new workers (as well as
controller and other processes), stop accepting connections by old workers,
reopen all log files. Note that old workers would be terminated after one minute
that should allow to process all pending requests. All new requests to rspamd
would be processed by newly started workers.
@item SIGTERM - terminate rspamd system.
@end itemize

These signals may be used in start scripts as it is done in @code{FreeBSD} start
script. Restarting of rspamd is doing rather softly: no connections would be
dropped and if new config is syntaxically incorrect old config would be used.

@chapter Configuring of rspamd.

@section Principles of work.

We need to define several terms to explain configuration of rspamd. Rspamd
operates with @strong{rules}, each rule defines some actions that should be done with
message to obtain result. Result is called @strong{symbol} - a symbolic
representation of rule. For example, if we have a rule to check DNS record for
a url that contains in message we may insert resulting symbol if this DNS record
is found. Each symbol has several attributes:
@itemize @bullet
@item name - symbolic name of symbol (usually uppercase, e.g. MIME_HTML_ONLY)
@item weight - numeric weight of this symbol (this means how important this rule is), may
be negative
@item options - list of symbolic options that defines additional information about
processing this rule
@end itemize

Weights of symbols are called @strong{factors}. Also when symbol is inserted it
is possible to define additional multiplier to factor. This can be used for
rules that have dynamic weights, for example statistical rules (when probability
is higher weight must be higher as well).

All symbols and corresponding rules are combined in @strong{metrics}. Metric
defines a group of symbols that are designed for common purposes. Each metric
has maximum weight: if sum of all rules' results (symbols) is bigger than this
limit then this message is considered as spam in this metric. The default metric
is called @emph{default} and rules that have not explicitly specified metric
would insert their results to this default metric.

Let's impress how this technics works:
@enumerate 1
@item First of all when rspamd is running each module (lua, internal or external
dynamic module) can register symbols in any defined metric. After this process
rspamd has a cache of symbols for each metric. This cache can be saved to file
for speeding up process of optimizing order of calling of symbols.
@item Rspamd gets a message from client and parse it with mime parsing and do
other parsing jobs like extracting text parts, urls, and stripping html tags.
@item For each metric rspamd is looking to metric's cache and select rules to
check according to their order (this order depends on frequence of symbol, its
weight and execution time).
@item Rspamd calls rules of metric till the sum weight of symbols in metric is
less than its limit.
@item If sum weight of symbols is more than limit the processing of rules is
stopped and message is counted as spam in this metric.
@end enumerate

After processing rules rspamd is also does statistic check of message. Rspamd
statistic module is presented as a set of @strong{classifiers}. Each classifier
defines algorithm of statistic checks of messages. Also classifier definition
contains definition of @strong{statistic files} (or @strong{statfiles} shortly).
Each statfile contains of number of patterns that are extracted from messages.
These patterns are put into statfiles during learning process. A short example:
you define classifier that contains two statfiles: @emph{ham} and @emph{spam}.
Than you find 10000 messages that are spam and 10000 messages that contains ham.
Then you learn rspamd with these messages. After this process @emph{ham}
statfile contains patterns from ham messages and @emph{spam} statfile contains
patterns from spam messages. Then when you are checking message via this
statfiles messages that are like spam would have more probability/weight in
@emph{spam} statfile than in @emph{ham} statfile and classifier would insert
symbol of @emph{spam} statfile and would calculate how this message is like
patterns that are contained in @emph{spam} statfile. But rspamd is not limiting
you to define one classifier or two statfiles. It is possible to define a number
of classifiers and a number of statfiles inside a classifier. It can be useful
for personal statistic or for specific spam patterns. Note that each classifier
can insert only one symbol - a symbol of statfile with max weight/probability.
Also note that statfiles check is allways done after all rules. So statistic can
@strong{correct} result of rules.

Now some words about @strong{modules}. All rspamd rules are contained in
modules. Modules can be internal (like SURBL, SPF, fuzzy check, email and
others) and external written in @code{lua} language. In fact there is no differ
in the way, how rules of these modules are called:
@enumerate 1
@item Rspamd loads config and loads specified modules.
@item Rspamd calls init function for each module passing configurations
arguments.
@item Each module examines configuration arguments and register its rules (or
not register depending on configuration) in rspamd metrics (or in a single
metric).
@item During metrics process rspamd calls registered callbacks for module's
rules.
@item These rules may insert results to metric.
@end enumerate

So there is no actual difference between lua and internal modules, each are just
providing callbacks for processing messages. Also inside callback it is possible
to change state of message's processing. For example this can be done when it is
required to make DNS or other network request and to wait result. So modules can
pause message's processing while waiting for some event. This is true for lua
modules as well.

@section Rspamd config file structure.

Rspamd config file is placed in PREFIX/etc/rspamd.xml by default. You can
specify other location by passing @option{-c} option to rspamd. Rspamd config file
contains configuration parameters in XML format. XML was selected for rather
simple manual editing config file and for simple automatic generation as well as
for dynamic configuration. I've decided to move rules logic from XML file to
keep it small and simple. So rules are defined in @code{lua} language and rspamd
parameters are defined in xml file (rspamd.xml). Configuration rules are
included by @strong{<lua>} tag that have @strong{src} attribute that defines
relative path to lua file (relative to placement of rspamd.xml):
@example
<lua src="rspamd/lua/rspamd.lua">fake</lua>
@end example
@noindent
Note that it is not currently possible to have empty tags. I hope this
restriction would be fixed in future. Rspamd xml config consists of several
sections:
@itemize @bullet
@item Main section - section where main config parameters are placed.
@item Workers section - section where workers are described.
@item Classifiers section - section where you define your classify logic
@item Modules section - a set of sections that describes module's rules (in fact
these rules should be in lua code)
@item Factors section - a section where you can set numeric values for symbols
@item Logging section - a section that describes rspamd logging
@item Views section - a section that defines rspamd views
@end itemize

So common structure of rspamd.xml can be described this way:
@example
<? xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<rspamd>
 <!-- Main section directives -->
 ...
 <!-- Workers directives -->
 <worker>
  ...
 </worker>
 ...
 <!-- Classifiers directives -->
 <classifier>
  ...
 </classifier>
 ...
 <!-- Factors -->
 <factors>
  <factor name="MIME_HTML_ONLY>1.1</factor>
  ...
 </factors>
 <!-- Logging section -->
 <logging>
  <type>console</type>
  <level>info</level>
  ...
 </logging>
 <!-- Views section -->
 <view>
  ...
 </view>
 ...
 <!-- Modules settings -->
 <module name="regexp">
  <option name="test">test</option>
  ...
 </module>
 ...
</rspamd>
@end example

Each of these sections would be described further in details.

@section Rspamd configuration atoms.

There are several primitive types of rspamd configuration parameters:
@itemize @bullet
@item String - common string that defines option.
@item Number - integer or fractional number (e.g.: 10 or -1.5).
@item Time - ammount of time in milliseconds, may has suffixes: 
@itemize @bullet
@item @emph{s} - for seconds (e.g. @emph{10s});
@item @emph{m} - for minutes (e.g. @emph{10m});
@item @emph{h} - for hours (e.g. @emph{10h});
@item @emph{d} - for days (e.g. @emph{10d});
@end itemize
@item Size - like number numerci reprezentation of size, but may have a suffix:
@itemize @bullet
@item @emph{k} - 'kilo' - number * 1024 (e.g. @emph{10k});
@item @emph{m} - 'mega' - number * 1024 * 1024 (e.g. @emph{10m});
@item @emph{g} - 'giga' - number * 1024 * 1024 * 1024 (e.g. @emph{1g});
@end itemize
@noindent
Size atoms are used for memory limits for example.
@item Lists - path to dynamic rspamd list (e.g. @emph{http://some.host/some/path}).
@end itemize

While practically all atoms are rather trivial to understand rspamd lists may
cause some confusion. Lists are widely used in rspamd for getting data that can
be often changed for example white or black lists, lists of ip addresses, lists
of domains. So for such purposes it is possible to use files that can be get
either from local filesystem (e.g. @code{file:///var/run/rspamd/whitelsist}) or
by HTTP (e.g. @code{http://some.host/some/path/list.txt}). Rspamd constantly
looks for changes in this files, if using HTTP it also set
@emph{If-Modified-Since} header and check for @emph{Not modified} reply. So it
causes no overhead when lists are not modified and may allow to store huge lists
and to distribute them over HTTP. Monitoring of lists is done with some random
delay (jitter), so if you have many rspamd servers in cluster that are
monitoring a single list they would come to check or download it in slightly different
time. The two most common list formats are @emph{IP list} and @emph{domains
list}. IP list contains of ip addresses in dot notation (e.g.
@code{192.168.1.1}) or ip/network pairs in CIDR notation (e.g.
@code{172.16.0.0/16}). Items in lists are separated by newline symbol. Lines
that begin with @emph{#} symbol are considered as comments and are ignored while
parsing. Domains list is very like ip list with difference that it contains
domain names.

@section Main rspamd configuration section.

Main rspamd configurtion section contains several definitions that determine
main parameters of rspamd for example path to pidfile, temporary directory, lua
includes, several limits e.t.c. Here is list of this directives explained:

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8
@headitem Tag @tab Mean

@item @var{<tempdir>}
@tab Defines temporary directory for rspamd. Default is to use @env{TEMP}
environment variable or @code{/tmp}.

@item @var{<pidfile>}
@tab Path to rspamd pidfile. Here would be stored a pid of main process.
Pidfile is used to manage rspamd from start scripts.

@item @var{<statfile_pool_size>}
@tab Limit of statfile pool size: a total number of bytes that can be used for
mapping statistic files. Rspamd is using LRU system and would unmap the most
unused statfile when this limit would be reached. The common sense is to set
this variable equal to total size of all statfiles, but it can be less than this
in case of dynamic statfiles (for per-user statistic).

@item @var{<filters>}
@tab List of enabled internal filters. Items in this list can be separated by
spaces, semicolons or commas. If internal filter is not specified in this line
it would not be loaded or enabled.

@item @var{<raw_mode>}
@tab Boolean flag that specify whether rspamd should try to convert all
messages to UTF8 or not. If @var{raw_mode} is enabled all messages are
processed @emph{as is} and are not converted. Raw mode is faster than utf mode
but it may confuse statistics and regular expressions.

@item @var{<lua>}
@tab Defines path to lua file that should be loaded fro configuration. Path to
this file is defined in @strong{src} attribute. Text inside tag is required but
is not parsed (this is stupid limitation of parser's design).
@end multitable

@section Rspamd logging configuration.

Rspamd has a number of logging variants. First of all there are three types of
logs that are supported by rspamd: console loggging (just output log messages to
console), file logging (output log messages to file) and logging via syslog.
Also it is possible to filter logging to specific level:
@itemize @bullet
@item error - log only critical errors
@item warning - log errors and warnings
@item info - log all non-debug messages
@item debug - log all including debug messages (huge amount of logging)
@end itemize
Also it is possible to turn on debug messages for specific ip addresses. This
ability is usefull for testing.

For each logging type there are special mandatory parameters: log facility for
syslog (read @emph{syslog (3)} manual page for details about facilities), log
file for file logging. Also file logging may be buffered for speeding up. For
reducing logging noise rspamd detects for sequential identic log messages and
replace them with total number of repeats:
@example
#81123(fuzzy): May 11 19:41:54 rspamd file_log_function: Last message repeated 155 times
#81123(fuzzy): May 11 19:41:54 rspamd process_write_command: fuzzy hash was successfully added
@end example

Here is summary of logging parameters:


@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8
@headitem Tag @tab Mean
@item @var{<type>}
@tab Defines logging type (file, console or syslog). For each type mandatory
attriute must be present:
@itemize @bullet
@item @emph{filename} - path to log file for file logging type;
@item @emph{facility} - syslog logging facility.
@end itemize

@item @var{<level>}
@tab Defines loggging level (error, warning, info or debug).

@item @var{<log_buffer>}
@tab For file and console logging defines buffer in bytes (kilo, mega or giga
bytes) that would be used for logging output.

@item @var{<log_urls>}
@tab Flag that defines whether all urls in message would be logged. Useful for
testing.

@item @var{<debug_ip>}
@tab List that contains ip addresses for which debugging would be turned on. For
more information about ip lists look at config atoms section.
@end multitable

@section Factors configuration.

Setting of rspamd factors is the main way to change rules' weights. Factors set
up weights for all rules: for those that have static weights (for example simple
regexp rules) and for those that have dynamic weights (for example statistic
rules). In all cases the base weight of rule is multiplied by factor value. For
static rules base weight is usually 1.0. So we have:
@itemize @bullet
@item @math{w_{symbol} = w_{static} * factor} - for static rules
@item @math{w_{symbol} = w_{dynamic} * factor} - for dynamic rules
@end itemize
Also there is an ability to add so called "grow factor" - additional multiplier
that would be used when we have more than one symbol in metric. So for each
added symbol this factor would increment its power. This can be written as:
@math{w_{total} = w_1 * gf ^ 0 + w_2 * gf ^ 1 + ... + w_n * gf ^ {n - 1}}
Grow multiplier is used to increment weight of rules when message got many
symbols (likely spammy). Note that only rules with positive weights would
increase grow factor, those with negative weights would just be added. Also note
that grow factor can be less than 1 but it is uncommon use (in this case we
would have weight lowering when we have many symbols for this message). Factors
can be set up with config section @emph{factors}:
@example
<factors>
 <factor name="MIME_HTML_ONLY">0.1</factor>
 <grow_factor>1.1</grow_factor>
</factors>
@end example

Note that you basically need to add factor when you add additional rules. The
decision of weight of newly added rule basically depends on its importance. For
example you are absolutely sure that some rule would add a symbol on only spam
messages, so you can increase weight of such rule so it would filter such spam.
But if you increase weight of rules you should be more or less sure that it
would not increase false positive errors rate to unacceptable level (false
positive errors are errors when good mail is treated as spam). Rspamd comes with
a set of default rules and default weights of that rules are placed in
rspamd.xml.sample. In most cases it is reasonable to change them for your mail
system, for example increase weights of some rules or decrease for others. Also
note that default grow factor is 1.0 that means that weights of rules do not
depend on count of added symbols. For some situations it useful to set grow
factor to value more than 1.0. Also by modifying factors it is possible to
manage static multiplier for dynamic rules.

@section Workers configuration.

Workers are rspamd processes that are doing specific jobs. Now are supported 4
types of workers:
@enumerate 1
@item Normal worker - a typical worker that process messages.
@item Controller worker - a worker that manages rspamd, get statistics and do
learning tasks.
@item Fuzzy storage worker - a worker that contains a collection of fuzzy
hashes.
@item LMTP worker - experimental worker that acts as LMTP server.
@end enumerate

These types of workers has some common parameters:
@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8
@headitem Parameter @tab Mean
@item @emph{<type>}
@tab Type of worker (normal, controller, lmtp or fuzzy)
@item @emph{<bind_socket>}
@tab Socket credits to bind this worker to. Inet and unix sockets are supported:
@example
<bind_socket>localhost:11333</bind_socket>
<bind_socket>/var/run/rspamd.sock</bind_socket>
@end example
@noindent
Also for inet sockets you may specify @code{*} as address to bind to all
available inet interfaces:
@example
<bind_socket>*:11333</bind_socket>
@end example
@noindent
@item @emph{<count>}
@tab Number of worker processes of this type. By default this number is
equialent to number of logical processors in system.
@item @emph{<maxfiles>}
@tab Maximum number of file descriptors available to this worker process.
@item @emph{<maxcore>}
@tab Maximum size of core file that would be dumped in cause of critical errors
(in mega/kilo/giga bytes).
@end multitable

Also each of workers types can have specific parameters:
@itemize @bullet
@item Normal worker:
@itemize @bullet
@item @var{<custom_filters>} - path to dynamically loaded plugins that would do real
check of incoming messages. These modules are described further.
@item @var{<mime>} - if this parameter is "no" than this worker assumes that incoming
messages are in non-mime format (e.g. forum's messages) and standart mime
headers are added to them.
@end itemize
@item Controller worker:
@itemize @bullet
@item @var{<password>} - a password that would be used to access to contorller's
privilleged commands.
@end itemize
@item Fuzzy worker:
@itemize @bullet
@item @var{<hashfile>} - a path to file where fuzzy hashes would be permamently stored.
@item @var{<use_judy>} - if libJudy is present in system use it for faster storage.
@item @var{<frequent_score>} - if judy is not turned on use this score to place hashes
with score that is more than this value to special faster list (this is designed
to increase lookup speed for frequent hashes).
@item @var{<expire>} - time to expire of fuzzy hashes after their placement in storage.
@end itemize
@end itemize

These parameters can be set inside worker's definition:
@example
<worker>
  <type>fuzzy</type>
  <bind_socket>*:11335</bind_socket>
  <count>1</count>
  <maxfiles>2048</maxfiles>
  <maxcore>0</maxcore>
<!-- Other params -->
    <param name="use_judy">yes</param>
    <param name="hashfile">/spool/rspamd/fuzzy.db</param>
    <param name="expire">10d</param>
</worker>
@end example
@noindent

The purpose of each worker's type would be described later. The main parameters
that could be defined are bind sockets for workers, their count, password for
controller's commands and parameters for fuzzy storage. Default config provides
reasonable values of this parameters (except password of course), so for basic
configuration you may just replace controller's password to more secure one.

@section Classifiers configuration.

@subsection Common classifiers options.

Each classifier has mandatory option @var{type} that defines internal algorithm
that is used for classifying. Currently only @code{winnow} is supported. You can
read theoretical description of algorithm used here: 
@url{http://www.siefkes.net/papers/winnow-spam.pdf}

The common classifier configuration consists of base classifier parameters and
definitions of two (or more than two) statfiles. During classify process rspamd
check each statfile in classifier and select those that has more
probability/weight than others. If all statfiles has zero weight this classifier
do not add any symbols. Among common classifiers options are:
@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8
@headitem Tag @tab Mean
@item @var{<tokenizer>}
@tab Tokenizer to extract tokens from messages. Currently only @emph{osb}
tokenizer is supported
@item @var{<metric>}
@tab Metric to which this classifier would insert symbol.
@end multitable

Also option @var{min_tokens} is supported to specify minimum number of tokens to
work with (this is usefull to avoid classifying of short messages as statistic
is practically useless for small amount of tokens). Here is example of base
classifier config:
@example
<classifier type="winnow">
 <tokenizer>osb-text</tokenizer>
 <metric>default</metric>
 <option name="min_tokens">20</option>
 <statfile>
  ...
 </statfile>
</classifier>
@end example

@subsection Statfiles options.

The most common statfile options are @var{symbol} and @var{size}. The first one defines
which symbol would be inserted if this statfile would have maximal weight inside
classifier and size defines statfile size on disk and in memory. Note that
statfiles are mapped directly to memory and you should practically note
parameter @var{statfile_pool_size} of main section which defines maximum ammount
of memory for mapping statistic files. Also note that statistic files are
of constant size: if you defines 100 megabytes statfile it would occupy 100
megabytes of disc space and 100 megabytes of memory when it is used (mapped).
Each statfile is indexed by tokens and contains so called "token chains". This
mechanizm would be described further but note that each statfile has parameter
"free tokens" that defines how much space is available for new tokens. If
statfile has no free space the most unused tokens would be removed from
statfile.

Here is list of common options of statfiles:
@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8
@headitem Tag @tab Mean
@item @var{<symbol>}
@tab Defines symbol to insert for this statfile.
@item @var{<size>}
@tab Size of this statfile in bytes (kilo/mega/giga bytes).
@item @var{<path>}
@tab Filesystem path to statistic file.
@item @var{<normalizer>}
@tab Defines weight normalization structure. Can be lua function name or
internal normalizer. Internal normalizer is defined in format:
"internal:<max_weight>" where max_weight is fractional number that limits the
maximum weight of this statfile's symbol (this is so called dynamic weight).
@item @var{<binlog>}
@tab Defines binlog affinity: master or slave. This option is used for statfiles
binary sync that would be described further.
@item @var{<binlog_master>}
@tab Defines credits of binlog master for this statfile.
@item @var{<binlog_rotate>}
@tab Defines rotate time for binlog.
@end multitable

Internal normalization of statfile weight works in this way:
@itemize @bullet
@item @math{R_{score} = 1} when @math{W_{statfile} < 1}
@item @math{R_{score} = W_statfile ^ 2} when @math{1 < W_{statfile} < max / 2}
@item @math{R_{score} = W_statfile} when @math{max / 2 < W_{statfile} < max}
@item @math{R_{score} = max} when @math{W_{statfile} > max}
@end itemize

The final result weight would be: @math{weight = R_{score} * W_{factor}}.
Here is sample classifier configuration with two statfiles that can be used for
spam/ham classifying:

@example
<factors>
   <factor name="WINNOW_HAM">-1.00</factor>
   <factor name="WINNOW_SPAM">1.00</factor>
...
</factors>

<!-- Classifiers section -->
<classifier type="winnow">
 <tokenizer>osb-text</tokenizer>
 <metric>default</metric>
 <option name="min_tokens">20</option>
 <statfile>
  <symbol>WINNOW_HAM</symbol>
  <size>100M</size>
  <path>/var/run/rspamd/data.ham</path>
  <normalizer>internal:3</normalizer>
 </statfile>
 <statfile>
  <symbol>WINNOW_SPAM</symbol>
  <size>100M</size>
  <path>/var/run/rspamd/data.spam</path>
  <normalizer>internal:3</normalizer>
 </statfile>
</classifier>
<!-- End of classifiers section -->
@end example
@noindent
In this sample we define classifier that contains two statfiles:
@emph{WINNOW_SPAM} and @emph{WINNOW_HAM}. Each statfile has 100 megabytes size
(so they would occupy 200Mb while classifying). Also each statfile has maximum
weight of 3 so with such factors (-1 for WINNOW_HAM and 1 for WINNOW_SPAM) the
result weight of symbols would be 0..3 for @emph{WINNOW_SPAM} and 0..-3 for
@emph{WINNOW_HAM}.

@section Modules config.

@subsection Lua modules loading.
For loading custom lua modules you should use @emph{<modules>} section:
@example
<modules>
 <module>/usr/local/etc/rspamd/plugins/lua</module>
</modules>
@end example
@noindent
Each @emph{<module>} directive defines path to lua modules. If this is a
directory so all @code{*.lua} files inside that directory would be loaded. If
this is a file it would be loaded directly.

@subsection Modules configuration.
Each module can have its own config section (this is true not only for internal
module but also for lua modules). Such section is called @emph{<module>} with
mandatory attribute @emph{"name"}. Each module can be configured by
@emph{<option>} directives. These directives must also have @emph{"name"}
attribute. So module configuration is done in @code{param = value} style:
@example
<module name="fuzzy_check">
  <option name="servers">localhost:11335</option>
  <option name="symbol">R_FUZZY</option>
  <option name="min_length">300</option>
  <option name="max_score">10</option>
  <option name="metric">default</option>
</module>
@end example
@noindent
The common parameters are:
@itemize @bullet
@item symbol - symbol that this module should insert.
@item metric - a metric in which this module shoul work.
@end itemize
But each module can have its own unique parameters. So it would be discussed
furhter in detailed modules description. Also note that for internal modules you
should edit @emph{<filters>} parameter in main section: this parameter defines
which internal modules would be turned on in this configuration.

@section Views config.
It is possible to make different rules for different
networks/senders/recipients. For this purposes you can use rspamd views: maps of
conditions (ip, sender, recipients) and actions, associated with them. For
example you can turn rspamd off for specific conditions by using
@emph{skip_check} action or check only specific rules. Views are defined inside
@emph{<view>} xml section. Here is list of available tags inside section:
@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8
@headitem Tag @tab Mean
@item @var{<skip_check>}
@tab Boolean flag (yes or no) that specifies whether rspamd checks should be
turned off for this ip
@item @var{<symbols>}
@tab Defines comma-separated list of symbols that should be checked for this
view
@item @var{<ip>}
@tab Map argument that defines path to list of ip addresses (may be with CIDR
masks) to which this view should be applied.
@item @var{<client_ip>}
@tab Map argument that defines path to list of ip addresses of rspamd clients 
to which this view should be applied. Note that this is ip of rspamd client not
ip of message's sender.
@item @var{<from>}
@tab Map argument that defines path to list of senders to which this view should
be applied.
@end multitable
Here is an example view definition
@example
<view>
 <skip_check>yes</skip_check>
 <ip>file:///usr/local/etc/rspamd/whitelist</ip>
</view>
@end example

@chapter Rspamd clients interaction.

@section Introduction.
After you have basic config file you may test rspamd functionality by using
whether telnet like utility or @emph{rspamc} client. For testing newly installed
config it is possible to run config file test:
@example
$ rspamd -t
syntax OK
@end example

Rspamc utility is written in @code{perl} language and uses perl modules that are
shipped with rspamd: @emph{Mail::Rspamd::Client} for client's protocol and
@emph{Mail::Rspamd::Config} for reading and writing configuration. The
documentation for these modules can be found by commands:
@example
$ perldoc Mail::Rspamd::Client
$ perldoc Mail::Rspamd::Config
@end example

So other way to access rspamd is to use perl client API:
@example
use Mail::Rspamd::Client;
my $config = @{
	hosts => ['localhost:11333'],
@};

my $client = new Mail::Rspamd::Client(%config);

if (! $client->ping()) @{
	die "Cannot ping rspamd: $client->@{error@}";
@}

my $result = $client->check($testmsg);

if ($result->@{'default'@}->@{isspam@} eq 'True') @{
	# do something with spam message here
@}
@end example

@section Rspamc protocol.
Rspamc protocol is an extension over traditional spamc protocol that is used by
spamassassin. This protocol looks like traditional HTTP session: first line is
method with version, headers can be passed by next lines and the message itself
is waited after empty line:
@example
<REQUEST>
SYMBOLS RSPAMC/1.1
Content-Length: 2200

<message octets>

<REPLY>
RSPAMD/1.1 0 OK
Metric: default; True; 10.40 / 10.00 / 0.00
Symbol: R_UNDISC_RCPT
Symbol: ONCE_RECEIVED
Symbol: R_MISSING_CHARSET
Urls: 
@end example
@noindent
The format of method line can be presented as:
@example
<COMMAND> RSPAMC/<version>
@end example
@noindent
Version can be 1.0 and 1.1. The main difference that in 1.1 metrics output also
has @emph{reject score} - hard limit of score for metric. This would be
discussed while describing user's options. Commands are:
@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8
@headitem Command @tab Mean
@item CHECK
@tab Check a message and output results for each metric. But do not output
symbols.
@item SYMBOLS
@tab Same as @emph{CHECK} but output symbols.
@item PROCESS
@tab Same as @emph{SYMBOLS} but output also original message with inserted
X-Spam headers.
@item PING
@tab Do not do any processing, just check rspamd state:
@example
$ telnet localhost 11333
Trying 127.0.0.1...
Connected to localhost.
Escape character is '^]'.
PING RSPAMC/1.1

RSPAMD/1.1 0 PONG
Connection closed by foreign host.
@end example
@noindent
@end multitable

After command there should be one mandatory header: @strong{Content-Length} that
defines message's length in bytes and optional headers:
@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8
@headitem Header @tab Mean
@item @var{Deliver-To:}
@tab Defines actual delivery recipient of message. Can be used for personalized
statistic and for user specific options.
@item @var{IP:}
@tab Defines IP from which this message is received.
@item @var{Helo:}
@tab Defines SMTP helo.
@item @var{From:}
@tab Defines SMTP mail from command data.
@item @var{Queue-Id:}
@tab Defines SMTP queue id for message (can be used instead of message id in
logging).
@item @var{Rcpt:}
@tab Defines SMTP recipient (it may be several @emph{Rcpt:} headers).
@item @var{Pass:}
@tab If this header has @emph{"all"} value, all filters would be checked for
this message.
@item @var{Subject:}
@tab Defines subject of message (is used for non-mime messages).
@item @var{User:}
@tab Defines SMTP user (this is currently unused in rspamd however).
@end multitable
So rspamc protocol allows to pass many data from MTA to rspamd. This is used to
increase speed of processing and for building filters (like SPF filter). Also
note that rspamd support spamassassin spamc protocol and you can even pass
rspamc headers in spamc mode, but reply of rspamd in spamc mode would be much
shorter: it would only use "default" metric and won't show additional options
for symbols. Rspamc reply looks like this:
@example
RSPAMD/1.1 0 OK
Metric: default; True; 10.40 / 10.00 / 0.00
Symbol: R_UNDISC_RCPT
Symbol: ONCE_RECEIVED
Symbol: R_MISSING_CHARSET
Urls: 
@end example
@noindent
First line is method reply: @code{<PROTOCOL>/<VERSION> <ERROR_CODE> <ERROR_REPLY>}.
Error code is 0 when no error occured. After first reply line there are metrics
output. For @emph{SYMBOLS} and @emph{PROCESS} commands there are symbols lines
after each metric. And for @emph{PROCESS} command there would be original
message after all metrics results. Metric result line looks like this:
@example
Metric: <name>; <result>; <score> / <required_score> / <reject_score>
@end example
@noindent
For 1.0 version of rspamc protocol @emph{reject_score} parameter is not printed.
Symbol line looks like this:
@example
Symbol: <Name>[; param1[, param2...]]
@end example
@noindent
Some symbols can have parameters attached. It is useful for example for RBL
checks (you can insert additional data after symbol name), for statistic and
fuzzy checks. Also rspamd inserts @emph{Urls} line in which all urls that are
contained in message are printed in comma-separated list.
Note that this protocol is used for normal workers. Controller, fuzzy storage
and lmtp/smtp workers are using other protocols. For example controller's
protocol is oriented on interactive sessions: you can pass many commands to
controller before disconnecting. Fuzzy storage is using UDP for making
interaction with storage faster. LMTP/SMTP workers are using lmtp and smtp
protocols. All of these protocols would be described in further chapters about
rspamd workers.

@section Controller protocol.

Rspamd controller can also be accessed by telnet, by rspamc client or by using
perl module Mail::Rspamd::Client. Controller protocol accepts commands and it is
possible to send several commands during a single session. Here is an example
telnet session:
@example
>telnet localhost 11334
Trying 127.0.0.1...
Connected to localhost.
Escape character is '^]'.
Rspamd version 0.3.0 is running on spam1.rambler.ru
stat
Messages scanned: 1526901
Messages treated as spam: 238171, 15.60%
Messages treated as ham: 1288730, 84.40%
Messages learned: 0
Connections count: 1529758
Control connections count: 15
Pools allocated: 3059589
Pools freed: 3056134
Bytes allocated: 98545852799
Memory chunks allocated: 8745374
Shared chunks allocated: 7
Chunks freed: 8737507
Oversized chunks: 768784
Fuzzy hashes stored: 0
Fuzzy hashes expired: 0
Statfile: WINNOW_SPAM (version 186); length: 100.0 MB; free blocks: 748504; total blocks: 6553581; free: 11.42%
Statfile: WINNOW_HAM (version 186); length: 100.0 MB; free blocks: 748504; total blocks: 6553581; free: 11.42%
END
@end example
@noindent

So you can see that reply from controller is ended with line that contains word
@strong{END}. It is also possible to get summary help for controller's commands:
@example
help
Rspamd CLI commands (* - privilleged command):
    help - this help message
(*) learn <statfile> <size> [-r recipient] [-m multiplier] [-f from] [-n] - learn message to specified statfile
    quit - quit CLI session
(*) reload - reload rspamd
(*) shutdown - shutdown rspamd
    stat - show different rspamd stat
    counters - show rspamd counters
    uptime - rspamd uptime
END
@end example
@noindent

Note that some commands are privilleged ones - you are required to enter a
password for them:
@example
>telnet localhost 11334
Trying 127.0.0.1...
Connected to localhost.
Escape character is '^]'.
Rspamd version 0.3.0 is running on spam1.rambler.ru
reload
not authorized
END

password q1
password accepted
END

reload
reload request sent
END
Connection closed by foreign host.
@end example
@noindent

This password is configured in rspamd.xml in worker section where you are
describing controller:
@example
<worker>
  <type>controller</type>
  ...
<!-- Other params -->
    <param name="password">q1</param>
</worker>
@end example

In many cases it is more easy to use rspamc to access controller. Here is
example of learning statfiles using rspamc CLI:
@example
% rspamc -h localhost:11334 -P q1 -s WINNOW_HAM learn < /tmp/exim.eml
Results for host localhost:11334:

Learn succeed. Sum weight: 1.51

% rspamc -h localhost:11334 -P q1 -s WINNOW_SPAM learn < /tmp/bad.eml
Results for host localhost:11334:

Learn succeed. Sum weight: 1.51
@end example

Note that rspamc handles password issues and other things like timeouts and
error handling inside and makes this tasks rather easy.

@section More about rspamc client.

Rspamc is small and simple client that allows to simplify common tasks for
rspamd manage. Rspamc is written in perl language and requires some modules for
its work:
@itemize @bullet
@item Mail::Rspamd::Client - a module that contains common function for
accessing rspamd, shipped with rspamd and installed automatically
@item Term::Cap - a module that allows basic interaction with terminal, can be
obtained via @url{http://www.cpan.org, cpan}.
@end itemize
Rspamc accepts several command line options:

@example
% rspamc --help
Usage: rspamc.pl [-h host] [-H hosts_list] [-P password] [-c conf_file] [-s statfile] [-d user@@domain] [command] [path]
-h         host to connect (in format host:port) or unix socket path 
-H         path to file that contains list of hosts
-P         define control password
-c         config file to parse
-s         statfile to use for learn commands

Additional options:
-d         define deliver-to header
-w         define weight for fuzzy operations
-S         define search string for IMAP operations
-i         emulate that message was send from specified IP
-p         pass message throught all filters

Notes:
imap format: imap:user:<username>:password:[<password>]:host:<hostname>:mbox:<mboxname>
Password may be omitted and then it would be asked in terminal
imaps requires IO::Socket::SSL

IMAP search strings samples:
ALL - All messages in the mailbox;
FROM <string> - Messages that contain the specified string in the envelope structure's FROM field;
HEADER <field-name> <string> - Messages that have a header with the specified field-name and that 
             contains the specified string in the text of the header (what comes after the colon);
NEW - Messages that have the Recent flag set but not the Seen flag. 
             This is functionally equivalent to "(RECENT UNSEEN)".
OLD - Messages that do not have the Recent flag set.
SEEN - Messages that have the Seen flag set.
SENTBEFORE <date> - Messages whose [RFC-2822] Date: header (disregarding time and timezone) 
             is earlier than the specified date.
TO <string> - Messages that contain the specified string in the envelope structure's TO field.
TEXT <string> - Messages that contain the specified string in the header or body of the message.
OR <search-key1> <search-key2> - Messages that match either search key (same for AND and NOT operations).

Version:   0.3.0
@end example
@noindent

After options you should specify command to execute, for example:
@example
% rspamc symbols < /tmp/exim.eml
@end example
@noindent
After command name you may specify objects to apply to: files, directories or
even imap folders:
@itemize @bullet
@item A single file:
@example
% rspamc symbols /tmp/exim.eml
@end example
@noindent
@item A list of files:
@example
% rspamc symbols /tmp/*.eml
@end example
@noindent
@item Directories:
@example
% rspamc symbols /tmp/*.eml /tmp/to_scan/
@end example
@noindent
@item IMAP folder:
@example
% rspamc symbols imap:user:username:password::host:localhost:mbox:INBOX
Enter IMAP password:
@end example
@noindent
Note that it is possible to specify empty password and be prompted for a
password during execution (you also need perl module Term::ReadKey for turning
on noecho input of password).
@end itemize
For fetching imap messages you may also use search string by specifying -S
option. Some examples of IMAP search strings can be found in a help message. For
more complex things you may read rfc3501 about imap4 search strings. This may be
found for example here: @url{http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc3501.html}. IMAP access
may be usefull for setting up automatic learning scripts. Also it is possible to
use SSL version of imap by specifying @strong{imaps} instead @strong{imap} as
first component. Note that for SSL access you need @emph{IO::Socket::SSL} perl
module.

@chapter Statistics and hashes storage.

@section Introduction.
First of all we need to strictly define purposes of hashes and statistic. Hashes
are used to find very close messages (for example messages where there are only
several words changed), while statistic can find @strong{probability} of
belonging message to specified class of messages. So when you learn rspamd with
message's hash you just add this hash to storage and when you learn rspamd
statistic you add tokens from message to specified class. So statistic is
probabilistic method to filter message, while fuzzy hashes can detect specific
patterns in messages and filter them.

@section Classifiers and statistic.
@subsection Tokenization.
Now rspamd supports OSB-Winnow statistic algorithm. Let's describe it in
details. First of all message is separeted into a set of tokens. The algorithm
of extracting tokens is rather simple now:
@enumerate 1
@item Extract graph symbols till first non-graph symbol (whitespace, punctuation
etc), the group of graph symbols forms a token, non-graphs are separators.
@item Fill an array with token till @strong{window size} is reached (currently
this size is 5 tokens).
@item Get pairs of tokens from array and extract their hashes:
@itemize @bullet
@item * . . . * -> token1 (h1, h5);
@item . * . . * -> token2 (h2, h5);
@item . . * . * -> token3 (h3, h5);
@item . . . * * -> token4 (h4, h5);
@end itemize
@noindent
@item Insert these tokens to statfile (indexed by first hash).
@item Shift window on next word.
@end enumerate
So after tokenizing process we would have tokens each of that contains 2 hashes of 2
words from message. This mechanics allows to count not only words itself but
also its combinations into a message, so providing more accurate statistic.

@subsection Classifying.
For classifying process @strong{winnow} algorithm is used. In this statistic
algtorithm we operate not with probabilities but with weights. Each token has
its own weight and when we learn some statfile with tokens rspamd does several
things:
@enumerate 1
@item Try to find token inside statfile.
@item If a token found multiply its weight by so called @strong{promotion
factor} (that is now 1.23).
@item If token not found insert it into statfile with weight 1.
@end enumerate

If it is needed to lower token weight, so its weight is multiplied with
@strong{demotion factor} (currently 0.83). Classify process is even more simple:
@enumerate 1
@item Extract tokens from a message.
@item For each statfile check weight of obtained tokens and store summary
weight.
@item Compare sums for each statfile and select statfile with the most big sum.
@item Do weight normalization and insert symbol of selected statfile.
@end enumerate

@subsection Statfiles synchronization.
Rspamd allows to make master/slave statfiles synchronization. This is done by
writing changes to statfiles to special @emph{binary log}. Binary log is a file
on filesystem named like statfile but with @emph{.binlog} suffix. Binary log
consist of two level indexes and binary changes to each statfile. So after each
learning process the version of affected statfiles is increased by 1 and a
record is written to binary log. Binary logs have fixed size limit and may have
time limit (rotate time). The process of synchronization may be described as:
@enumerate 1
@item Slave rspamd periodically asks master for version of statfiles monitored.
@item If master has version that is larger than slave's one the synchronization
process starts.
@item During synchronization process master looks at version reported by client
in binary log.
@item If version is found all records that are @strong{after} client's version
are sent to client.
@item Client accepts changes and apply binary patches one-by-one incrementing
statfile's version.
@item If version that client reports is not found in binary log the completely
statfile is sent to client (slow way, but practically that would take place only
once for fresh slaves).
@end enumerate

Here is example configuration for master statfile:
@example
 <statfile>
  <symbol>WINNOW_HAM</symbol>
  <size>100M</size>
  <path>/spool/rspamd/data.ham</path>
  <normalizer>internal:3</normalizer>
  <binlog>master</binlog>
  <binlog_rotate>1d</binlog_rotate>
 </statfile>
@end example
@noindent
Here we define binlog affinity (master) that automatically create binlog file
@file{/spool/rspamd/data.ham.binlog} and set up time limit for it (1 day).
For slaves you should first of all set up controller worker to accept network
connections (statfile synchronization is done via controller workers). The
second task is to define affinity for slave and master's address:
@example
 <statfile>
  <symbol>WINNOW_HAM</symbol>
  <size>100M</size>
  <path>/spool/rspamd/data.ham</path>
  <normalizer>internal:3</normalizer>
  <binlog>slave</binlog>
  <binlog_master>spam10:11334</binlog_master>
 </statfile>
@end example

@subsection Conclusion.
Statfiles synchronization allows to set up rspamd cluster that uses the common
statfiles and easily learn the whole cluster without unnecessary overhead.

@section Hashes and hash storage.
@subsection Fuzzy hashes.
Hashes that are used in rspamd for messages are not cryptoghraphic. Instead of
them fuzzy hashes are used. Fuzzy hashes is technics that allows to obtain
common hashes for common messages (for cryptographic hashes you usually get very
different hashes even if input messages are very common but not identical). The
main principle of fuzzy hashing is to break up text parts of message into small
pieces (blocks) and calculate hash for each block using so called @emph{rolling
hash}. After this process the final hash is forming by setting bytes in it from
blocks. So if we have 2 messages each of that contains 100 blocks and 99 of them 
are identical we would have 2 hashes that differs only in one byte. So we can
consider that one message is 99% like other message. 

@subsection Fuzzy storage.
In rspamd hashes can be stored in fuzzy storage. Fuzzy storage is a special
worker that can store hashes and reply about score of hashes. Inside fuzzy
storage each hash has its own weight and list number. List number is integer
that specify to which list this hash is related. This number can be used in
fuzzy_check plugin inside rspamd to add custom symbol. There are two ways of
storing fuzzy hashes: store them in a set of linear linked lists and storing
hashes in very fast judy tree. First way is good for a relatively small number
of fuzzy hashes. Also in this case @emph{fuzzy match} is used, so you can find
not only identical hashes but also common hashes. But for large number of hashes
this method is very slow. The second way requires libJudy in system (can be
found at @url{http://judy.sourceforge.net}) and turns off @emph{fuzzy matching}
- only identical hashes would be found. On the other hand you may store millions
of hashes in judy tree not loosing nor memory, nor CPU.

@subsection Conclusion.
Fuzzy hashes is efficient way to make up different black or white lists. Fuzzy
storage can be distributed over several machines (if you specify several storage
servers rspamd would select upstream by hash of fuzzy hash). Also storage can
contain several lists identified by number. Each hash has its own weight that
allows to set up dynamic rules that add different score from different hashes.

@chapter Rspamd modules.

@section Introduction.

This chapter describes modules that are shipped with rspamd. Here you can find
details about modules configuration, principles of working, tricks to make spam
filtering effective. First sections describe internal modules written in C:
regexp (regular expressions), surbl (black list for URLs), fuzzy_check (checks
for fuzzy hashes), chartable (check for character sets in messages) and emails
(check for blacklisted email addresses in messages). Modules configuration can
be done in lua or in config file itself. 

@subsection Lua configuration.
You may use lua for setting configuration options for modules. With lua you can
write rather complex rules that can contain not only text lines, but also some
lua functions that would be called while processing messages. For loading lua
configuration you should add line to rspamd.xml:
@example
<lua src="/usr/local/etc/rspamd/lua/my.lua">fake</lua>
@end example
@noindent
It is possible to load several scripts this way. Inside lua file there would be
defined global table with name @var{config}. This table should contain
configuration options for modules indexed by module. This can be written this
way:
@example
config['module_name'] = @{@}
local mconfig = config['module_name']

mconfig['option_name'] = 'option value'

local a = 'aa'
local b = 'bb'

mconfig['other_option'] = string.format('%s, %s', a, b)
@end example
@noindent
In this simple example we defines new element of table that is associated with
module named 'module_name'. Then we assign to it an empty table (@code{@{@}})
and associate local variable mconfig. Then we set some elements of this table,
that is equialent to setting module options like that:
@example
option_name = option_value
other_option = aa, bb
@end example
@noindent
Also you may assign to elements of modules tables some functions. That functions
should accept one argument - worker task object and return result specific for
that option: number, string, boolean. This can be shown on this simple example:
@example

local function test (task)
	if task:get_ip() == '127.0.0.1' then
		return 1
	else
		return 0
	end
end

mconfig['some_option'] = test
@end example
In this example we assign to module option 'some_option' a function that check
for message's ip and return 1 if that ip is '127.0.0.1'.

So using lua for configuration can help for making complex rules and for
structuring rules - you can place options for specific modules to specific files
and use lua function @code{dofile} for loading them (or add other @code{<lua>}
tag to rspamd.xml).

@subsection XML configuration.

Options for rspamd modules can be set up from xml file too. This can be used for
simple and/or temporary rules and should not be used for complex rules as this
would make xml file too hard to read and edit. Thought it is surely possible but
not recommended from points of config file understanding. Here is a simple
example of module config options:
@example
<module name="module_name">
 <option name="option_name">option_value</option>
 <option name="other_option">aa, bb</option>
</module>
@end example
@noindent
Note that you need to encode xml entitles like @code{&} - @code{&amp;} and so
on. Also only utf8 encoding is allowed. In sample rspamd configuration all
modules except regexp module are configured via xml as they have only settings
and regexp module has rules that are sometimes rather complex.

@section Regexp module.

@subsection Introduction.
Regexp module is one of the most important rspamd modules. Regexp module can
load regular expressions and filter messages according to them. Also it is
possible to use logical expressions of regexps to create complex rules of
filtering. It is allowed to use logical operators:
@itemize @bullet
@item & - logical @strong{AND} function
@item | - logical @strong{OR} function
@item ! - logical @strong{NOT} function
@end itemize
Also it is possible to use brackets for making priorities in expressions. Regexp
module operates with @emph{regexp items} that can be combined with logical
operators into logical @emph{regexp expresions}. Each expression is associated
with its symbol and if it evaluates to true with this message the symbol would
be inserted. Note that rspamd uses internal optimization of logical expressions
(for example if we have expression 'rule1 & rule2' rule2 would not be evaluated
if rule1 is false) and internal regexp cache (so if rule1 and rule2 have common
items they would be evaluated only once). So if you need speed optimization of
your rules you should take this fact into consideration.

@subsection Regular expressions.
Rspamd uses perl compatible regular expressions. You may read about perl regular
expression syntax here: @url{http://perldoc.perl.org/perlre.html}. In rspamd
regular expressions must be enclosed in slashes:
@example
/^\\d+$/
@end example
@noindent
If '/' symbol must be placed into regular expression it should be escaped:
@example
/^\\/\\w+$/
@end example
@noindent
After last slash it is possible to place regular expression modificators:
@multitable @columnfractions 0.1 0.9
@headitem Modificator @tab Mean
@item @strong{i} @tab Ignore case for this expression.
@item @strong{m} @tab Assume this expression as multiline.
@item @strong{s} @tab Assume @emph{.} as all characters including newline
characters (should be used with @strong{m} flag).
@item @strong{x} @tab Assume this expression as extended regexp.
@item @strong{u} @tab Performs ungreedy matches.
@item @strong{o} @tab Optimize regular expression.
@item @strong{r} @tab Assume this expression as @emph{raw} (this is actual for
utf8 mode of rspamd).
@item @strong{H} @tab Search expression in message's headers.
@item @strong{X} @tab Search expression in raw message's headers (without mime
decoding).
@item @strong{M} @tab Search expression in the whole message (must be used
carefully as @strong{the whole message} would be checked with this expression).
@item @strong{P} @tab Search expression in all text parts.
@item @strong{U} @tab Search expression in all urls.
@end multitable

You can combine flags with each other:
@example
/^some text$/iP
@end example
@noindent
All regexp must be with type: H, X, M, P or U as rspamd should know where to
search for specified pattern. Header regexps (H and X) have special syntax if
you need to check specific header, for example @emph{From} header:
@example
From=/^evil.*$/Hi
@end example
@noindent
If header name is not specified all headers would be matched. Raw headers is
matching is usefull for searching for mime specific headers like MIME-Version.
The problem is that gmime that is used for mime parsing adds some headers
implicitly, for example @emph{MIME-Version} and you should match them using raw
headers. Also if header's value is encoded (base64 or quoted-printable encoding)
you can search for decoded version using H modificator and for raw using X
modificator. This is usefull for finding bad encodings types or for unnecessary
encoding.

@subsection Internal function.
Rspamd provides several internal functions for simplifying message processing.
You can use internal function as items in logical expressions as they like
regular expressions return logical value (true or false). Here is list of
internal functions with their arguments:
@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.2 0.5
@headitem Function @tab Arguments @tab Description
@item header_exists 
@tab header name 
@tab Returns true if specified header exists.

@item compare_parts_distance
@tab number
@tab If message has two parts (text/plain and text/html) compare how much they
differs (html messages are compared with stripped tags). The difference is
number in percents (0 is identically parts and 100 is totally different parts).
So if difference is more than number this function returns true.

@item compare_transfer_encoding
@tab string
@tab Compares header Content-Transfer-Encoding with specified string.

@item content_type_compare_param
@tab param_name, param_value
@tab Compares specified parameter of Content-Type header with regexp or certain
string:
@example
content_type_compare_param(Charset, /windows-\d+/)
content_type_compare_param(Charset, ascii)
@end example
@noindent 

@item content_type_has_param
@tab param_name
@tab Returns true if content-type has specified parameter.

@item content_type_is_subtype
@tab subtype_name
@tab Return true if content-type is of specified subtype (for example for
text/plain subtype is 'plain').

@item content_type_is_type
@tab type_name
@tab Return true if content-type is of specified type (for example for
text/plain subtype is 'text'):
@example
content_type_is_type(text)
content_type_is_subtype(/?.html/)
@end example
@noindent

@item regexp_match_number 
@tab number,[regexps list]
@tab Returns true if specified number of regexps matches for this message. This
can be used for making rules when you do not know which regexps should match but
if 2 of them matches the symbol shoul be inserted. For example:
@example
regexp_match_number(2, /^some evil text.*$/Pi, From=/^hacker.*$/H, header_exists(Subject))
@end example
@noindent
	
@item has_only_html_part
@tab nothing
@tab Returns true when message has only HTML part

@item compare_recipients_distance
@tab number
@tab Like compare_parts_distance calculate difference between recipients. Number
is used as minimum percent of difference. Note that this function would check
distance only when there are more than 5 recipients in message.

@item is_recipients_sorted
@tab nothing
@tab Returns true if recipients list is sorted. This function would also works
for more than 5 recipients.

@item is_html_balanced
@tab nothing
@tab Returns true when all HTML tags in message are balanced.

@item has_html_tag
@tab tag_name
@tab Returns true if tag 'tag_name' exists in message.

@item check_smtp_data
@tab item, regexp
@tab Returns true if specified part of smtp dialog matches specified regexp. Can
check HELO, FROM and RCPT items.

@end multitable

These internal functions can be easily implemented in lua but I've decided to
make them built-in as they are widely used in our rules. In fact this list may
be extended in future.

@subsection Conclusion.
Rspamd regexp module is powerfull tool for matching different patterns in
messages. You may use logical expressions of regexps and internal rspamd
functions to make rules. Rspamd is shipped with many rules for regexp module
(most of them are taken from spamassassin rules as rspamd originally was a
replacement of spamassassin) so you can look at them in ETCDIR/rspamd/lua/regexp
directory. There are many built-in rules with detailed comments. Also note that
if you add logical rule into XML file you need to escape all XML entitles (like
@emph{&} operators). When you make complex rules from many parts do not forget
to add brackets for parts inside expression as you would not predict order of
checks otherwise. Rspamd regexp module has internal logical optimization and
regexp cache, so you may use identical regexp many times - they would be matched
only once. And in logical expression you may optimize performance by putting
likely TRUE regexp first in @emph{OR} expression and likely FALSE expression
first in @emph{AND} expression. A number of internal functions can simplify
complex expressions and for making common filters. Lua functions can be added in
rules as well (they should return boolean value).

@section SURBL module.

Surbl module is designed for checking urls via blacklists. You may read about
surbls at @url{http://www.surbl.org}. Here is the sequence of operations that is
done by surbl module:
@enumerate 1
@item Extract all urls in message and get domains for each url.
@item Check to special list called '2tld' and extract 3 components for domains
from that list and 2 components for domains that are not listed:
@example
http://virtual.somehost.domain.com/some_path
-> somehost.domain.com if domain.com is in 2tld list
-> domain.com if not in 2tld
@end example
@noindent
@item Remove duplicates from domain lists
@item For each registered surbl do dns request in form @emph{domain.surbl_name}
@item Get result and insert symbol if that name resolves
@item It is possible to examine bits in returned IP address and insert different
symbol for each bit that is turned on in result.
@end enumerate
All DNS requests are done asynchronously so you may not bother about blocking.
SURBL module has several configuration options:
@itemize @bullet
@item @emph{metric} - metric to insert symbol to.
@item @emph{2tld} - list argument of domains for those 3 components of domain name
would be extracted.
@item @emph{max_urls} - maximum number of urls to check.
@item @emph{whitelist} - map of domains for which surbl checks would not be performed.
@item @emph{suffix} - a name of surbl. It is possible to add several suffixes:
@example
suffix_RAMBLER_URIBL = insecure-bl.rambler.ru
or in xml:
 <param name="suffix_RAMBLER_URIBL">insecure-bl.rambler.ru</param>
@end example
@noindent
It is possible to add %b to symbol name for checking specific bits:
@example
suffix_%b_SURBL_MULTI = multi.surbl.org
then you may define replaces for %b in symbol name for each bit in result:
bit_2 = SC -> sc.surbl.org
bit_4 = WS -> ws.surbl.org
bit_8 = PH -> ph.surbl.org
bit_16 = OB -> ob.surbl.org
bit_32 = AB -> ab.surbl.org
bit_64 = JP -> jp.surbl.org
@end example
@noindent
So we make one DNS request and check for specific list by checking bits in
result ip. This is described in surbl page:
@url{http://www.surbl.org/lists.html#multi}. Note that result symbol would NOT
contain %b as it would be replaced by bit name. Also if several bits are set
several corresponding symbols would be added.
@end itemize

Also surbl module can use redirector - a special daemon that can check for
redirects. It uses HTTP/1.0 for requests and accepts a url and returns resolved
result. Redirector is shipped with rspamd but not enabled by default. You may
enable it on stage of configuring but note that it requires many perl modules
for its work. Rspamd redirector is described in details further. Here are surbl
options for working with redirector:
@itemize @bullet
@item @emph{redirector}: adress of redirector (in format host:port)
@item @emph{redirector_connect_timeout} (seconds): redirector connect timeout (default: 1s)
@item @emph{redirector_read_timeout} (seconds): timeout for reading data (default: 5s)
@item @emph{redirector_hosts_map} (map string): map that contains domains to check with redirector
@end itemize

So surbl module is an easy to use way to check message's urls and it may be used
in every configuration as it filters rather big ammount of email spam and scam.

@section SPF module.

SPF module is designed to make checks of spf records of sender's domains. SPF
records are placed in TXT DNS items for domains that have enabled spf. You may
read about SPF at @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sender_Policy_Framework}.
There are 3 results of spf check for domain:
@itemize @bullet
@item ALLOW - this ip is allowed to send messages for this domain
@item FAIL - this ip is @strong{not} allowed to send messages for this domain
@item SOFTFAIL - it is unknown whether this ip is allowed to send mail for this
domain
@end itemize
SPF supports different mechanizms for checking: dns subrequests, macroses,
includes, blacklists. Rspamd supports the most of them. Also for security
reasons there is internal limits for DNS subrequests and inclusions recursion.
SPF module support very small ammount of options:
@itemize @bullet
@item @emph{metric} (string): metric to insert symbol (default: 'default')
@item @emph{symbol_allow} (string): symbol to insert (default: 'R_SPF_ALLOW')
@item @emph{symbol_fail} (string): symbol to insert (default: 'R_SPF_FAIL')
@item @emph{symbol_softfail} (string): symbol to insert (default: 'R_SPF_SOFTFAIL')
@end itemize

@section Chartable module.

Chartable is a simple module that detects different charsets in a message. This
module is aimed to protect from emails that contains symbols from different
character sets that looks like each other. Chartable module works differently
for raw and utf modes: in utf modes it detects different characters from unicode
tables and in raw modes only ASCII and non-ASCII symbols. Configuration of whis
module is very simple:
@itemize @bullet
@item @emph{metric} (string): metric to insert symbol (default: 'default')
@item @emph{symbol} (string): symbol to insert (default: 'R_BAD_CHARSET')
@item @emph{threshold} (double): value that would be used as threshold in expression 
@math{N_{charset-changes} / N_{chars}}
(e.g. if threshold is 0.1 than charset change should occure more often than in 10 symbols), 
default: 0.1
@end itemize

@section Fuzzy check module.

Fuzzy check module provides a client for rspamd fuzzy storage. Fuzzy check can
work with a cluster of rspamd fuzzy storages and the specific storage is
selected by value of hash of message's hash. The available configuration options
are:
@itemize @bullet
@item @emph{metric} (string): metric to insert symbol (default: 'default')
@item @emph{symbol} (string): symbol to insert (default: 'R_FUZZY')
@item @emph{max_score} (double): maximum score to that weights of hashes would be 
normalized (default: 0 - no normalization)
@item @emph{fuzzy_map} (string): a string that contains map in format @{ fuzzy_key => [
symbol, weight ] @} where fuzzy_key is number of fuzzy list. This string itself
should be in format 1:R_FUZZY_SAMPLE1:10,2:R_FUZZY_SAMPLE2:1 etc, where first
number is fuzzy key, second is symbol to insert and third - weight for
normalization
@item @emph{min_length} (integer): minimum length (in characters) for text part to be
checked for fuzzy hash (default: 0 - no limit)
@item @emph{whitelist} (map string): map of ip addresses that should not be checked
with this module
@item @emph{servers} (string): list of fuzzy servers in format
"server1:port,server2:port" - these servers would be used for checking and
storing fuzzy hashes
@end itemize

@section Forged recipients.

Forged recipients is a lua module that compares recipients provided by smtp
dialog and recipients from @emph{To:} header. Also it is possible to compare
@emph{From:} header with SMTP from. So you may set @strong{symbol_rcpt} option
to set up symbol that would be inserted when recipients differs and
@strong{symbol_sender} when senders differs.

@section Maillist.

Maillist is a module that detects whether this message is send by using one of
popular mailing list systems (among supported are ezmlm, mailman and
subscribe.ru systems). The module has only option @strong{symbol} that defines a
symbol that would be inserted if this message is sent via mailing list.

@section Once received.

This lua module checks received headers of message and insert symbol if only one
received header is presented in message (that usually signals that this mail is
sent directly to our MTA). Also it is possible to insert @emph{strict} symbol
that indicates that host from which we receive this message is either
unresolveable or has bad patterns (like 'dynamic', 'broadband' etc) that
indicates widely used botnets. Configuration options are:
@itemize @bullet
@item @emph{symbol}: symbol to insert for messages with one received header.
@item @emph{symbol_strict}: symbol to insert for messages with one received
header and containing bad patterns or unresolveable sender.
@item @emph{bad_host}: defines pattern that would be count as "bad".
@item @emph{good_host}: defines pattern that would be count as "good" (no strict
symbol would be inserted), note that "good" has a priority over "bad" pattern.
@end itemize
You can define several "good" and "bad" patterns for this module.

@section Received rbl.

Received rbl module checks for all received headers and make dns requests to IP
black lists. This can be used for checking whether this email was transfered by
some blacklisted gateway. Here are options available:
@itemize @bullet
@item @emph{symbol}: symbol to insert if message contains blacklisted received
headers
@item @emph{rbl}: a name of rbl to check, it is possible to define specific
symbol for this rbl by adding symbol name after semicolon:
@example
rbl = pbl.spamhaus.org:RECEIVED_PBL
@end example
@end itemize

@section Conclusion.

Rspamd is shipped with some ammount of modules that provides basic functionality
fro checking emails. You are allowed to add custom rules for regexp module and
to set up available parameters for other modules. Also you may write your own
modules (in C or Lua) but this would be described further in this documentation.
You may set configuration options for modules from lua or from xml depends on
its complexity. Internal modules are enabled and disabled by @strong{filters}
configuration option. Lua modules are loaded and usually can be disabled by
removing their configuration section from xml file or by removing corresponding
line from @strong{modules} section.

@bye
