---
layout: post
title:  "Rspamd 0.9 has been released"
categories: news
---

After almost half a year of development we are intorducing rspamd 0.9 which is the next major version of rspamd. You can view the full list of changes in the
[ChangeLog file](https://github.com/vstakhov/rspamd/blob/master/ChangeLog). But here is the list of the most notable changes introduced in this version:

* Improved optimizations via abstract syntax tree for all expressions (my [presentation](https://highsecure.ru/ast-rspamd.pdf) describes some basic principles of optimizations.
* Switched to luajit and pcre jit by default. JIT compilation allowed to improve the performance in the bottlenecks so now rspamd is significantly faster than 0.8 branch.
* Added spamassassin rules support: you can now use the most of your spamassassin rules in rspamd natively. Of course, they are optimized with JIT and AST techniques.
* Added encryption support: rspamd now can encrypt all traffic with extremely fast and low latency encryption based on public key cryptography and [cryptobox construction](http://cr.yp.to/highspeed/coolnacl-20120725.pdf).
* New aho-corasic implementation has been [imported](https://github.com/mischasan/aho-corasick). Now rspamd can search for hundreds thousands of search patterns in almost linear time.
* New statistics architecture:
	- advanced tokenization techniques (secure or fast hashes);
	- improved UTF8 tokenization;
	- avoid multiple learning by the same message by maintaining learning cache;
	- improved features normalization to reduce false positives rate.

Moreover, this release contains a lot of other improvements to plugins, lua API, rspamd core and the build system. In fact, the most of rspamd codebase has been either reworked or completely rewritten
to improve the architecture, performance and stability.
