---
layout: post
title:  "Rspamd 1.3.5 has been released"
categories: announce
---

The next stable version of Rspamd is now available to [download]({{ site.baseurl }}/downloads.html). This release contains a couple of bugfixes and minor improvements.

### Termination handlers

Rspamd can now perform some actions on termination of worker processes. For example, it is useful for [neural network]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/doc/modules/fann.html) plugin to save training data on exit. It was also essential for RRD statistics to synchronize RRD on controller's termination to avoid negative message rates on graphs.


### Minimum learns has been fixed

This option was improperly configured previously so it didn't work as desired. However, it is indeed useful to stop statistical classification before there is enough training for the Bayes classifier. With 1.3.5 release, this option has been fixed. 


### Rspamd on OpenBSD

There were a couple of bug fixes that allowed Rspamd to run on OpenBSD again. These bugs were cloaked by other systems, however, they were potentially dangerous for those systems as well.


### DMARC and DKIM improvements

[Andrew Lewis](https://github.com/fatalbanana) has added various improvements for DKIM, DMARC and SPF plugins to handle cases when the corresponding policies are not listed by senders: e.g. when there is no SPF record or DKIM key for some domain.


### Ratelimits improvements

It is now possible to disable ratelimits for specific users.


### Mailbox messages and `rspamc`

Rspamd command line client `rspamc` can now work with messages in UNIX `mailbox` format which is sometimes used to store messages on the disk.


### Spamhaus DROP Support

Rspamd now supports [Spamhaus DROP](https://www.spamhaus.org/drop/) dns block list that is used to block large botnets over the world.


### DKIM verification improvements

Some bugs related to canonicanization of empty messages are fixed in the DKIM plugin.


### Fix critical issue with line endings finding

There was a critical bug in Rspamd related to parsing of newlines offsets in a message. In some certain cases it could lead to serious malfunction in URLs detector and some other crucial parts of Rspamd.


### Minor bugfixes

There are a couple of minor bugfixes in this release, for example, parsing of `\0` symbol in `lua_tcp` module. `HFILTER_URL_ONLY` is fixed not to produce overly high scores. All invocations of `table.maxn` have been removed from Lua plugins as this function is deprecated in Lua.
