---
layout: post
title:  "Rspamd 1.3.2 has been released"
categories: announce
---

The next stable version of Rspamd, `1.3.2`, is now available. It contains many improvements, bug fixes and another integration method: [Communigate Pro](https://www.communigate.com/communigatepro) helper. Here are the main improvements added in this version:

### Important bug fixes

There was a bug introduced in `1.3.0` related to multiple value header processing which broke, for instance, the processing of multiple SMTP recipients. This issue has been fixed in `1.3.2`. 

Attributes in HTML tags are now HTML decoded to avoid polluting other elements.

The last element in DMARC records is now correctly parsed.

Hfilter module has been reworked to reduce false positive hits rate for hostnames and SMTP helo values.

### SPF plugin features

Rspamd now recognizes DNS failures when resolving SPF records and abstains from caching failed lookups. There is now a new symbol `R_SPF_DNSFAIL` that is inserted when there was a DNS error during resolving of a SPF record. Furthermore, Rspamd will not insert `R_SPF_DENY` if there was an error looking up records required by policy.

### Better HTML support

There are a couple of features and important bugs fixes for HTML parser introduced in Rspamd `1.3.2`. There is new HTML block elements parser that can deal with colors in HTML documents and, in particular, with named colors. Secondly, parsed HTML tags now contain the length of the content enclosed within the tag. And finally, the Lua API is improved with a new [`foreach_tag`]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/doc/lua/html.html#mb0fe5) method that allows traversing across particular HTML tags examining their content. The existing HTML related rules are updated accordingly to deal with HTML spam better using the new API.

### Improved settings matches for authorized users

It is now possible to match any authorized user when applying user settings. It might be useful for applying different settings to authenticated users:

~~~ucl
outbound {
  priority = high;
  id = "outbound";
  authenticated = true;

  apply {
    groups_disabled = ["hfilter", "spf", "dkim", "rbl"];
  }
}
~~~

### Redis integration fix

Rspamd no longer uses the `KEYS pattern*` command for getting statistics. It was [found](https://github.com/vstakhov/rspamd/issues/791) that this command literally kills Redis performance on large data sets. This mechanism has been reworked to avoid `KEYS` command.

### DKIM support improvements

DKIM signing has been fixed with additional tests added. `rspamc` utility can now use a DKIM signature header passed by Rspamd to sign email in `--mime` mode. DKIM header folding issues have been found and fixed in Rspamd 1.3.2.

### URL detection fixes

Rspamd now tries to search for a longest possible suffix when matching TLD parts to distinguish between common suffixes of different length, for example `.net` and `.in.net`.