---
layout: post
title:  "Rspamd 1.2 has been released"
categories: announce
---

The next major release of rspamd: `1.2.0` is now released.

Key features:

* Dynamic rule updates
* Regular expressions maps support
* Better performance: pcre2 support, faster fuzzy hashes, faster IP lookups
* Improved stability: fixed many important bugs and memory leaks

This version is a gradual improvement over the previous `1.1` branch. It is the first release with [rule updates]({{ site.baseurl }}/doc/modules/rspamd_update.html) support. I believe that it would be easier to backport new rules or critical score changes from the experimental branch to the stable one. Updates are signed to protect their integrity and authenticate the update source.

Among other features introduced by this version are regular expression maps support (with hyperscan acceleration if available). These maps could be used to match many regular expressions and, at the same time, detect certain patterns in the messages being scanned.

Rspamd 1.2 has a couple of performance improvements: it now supports the [PCRE 2](http://pcre.org) regular expressions library that is usually faster than pcre 1. Fuzzy hashing gets further improvements by utilizing AVX2 instructions which are available for the Intel Haswell CPU family. From version 1.2 onwards, rspamd uses a better algorithm to store IP addresses allowing lookups among millions of IPv4 and IPv6 records in almost zero time.

The new release is scanned with [Coverity scan](https://scan.coverity.com/) and other static analysis tools that helped to fix many potential bugs and leaks. I believe that rspamd 1.2 is stable, solid and completely production-ready so far.

The complete log of changes can be found here: <https://github.com/vstakhov/rspamd/blob/1.2.0/ChangeLog>

There are many important additions in the documentation shipped with rspamd. There is now a [frequently asked questions]({{ site.baseurl }}/doc/faq.html) article that describes many aspects of practical rspamd use. The [quick start guide]({{ site.baseurl }}/doc/quickstart.html) has also been updated to improve new users' experience when installing and running rspamd.

[Rmilter]({{ site.baseurl }}/rmilter/) has been also upgraded to version `1.7.5` which fixes important greylisting and clamav issues. The rmilter changelog is available here: <https://github.com/vstakhov/rmilter/blob/1.7.5/ChangeLog>
