---
layout: post
title:  "Rspamd 1.3.3 has been released"
categories: announce
---

The new stable version of Rspamd is available: `1.3.3`. This release includes a couple of critical bugs fixes and important improvements. We recommend to **update** Rspamd to version `1.3.3` as soon as possible due to a serious error in fuzzy hashes processing.

### Important fuzzy hashes incompatibility

There was a serious bug in fuzzy check plugin when using transport encryption and the default fuzzy key. Since encryption is enabled in the default configuration, **all** users should consider updating their Rspamd packages. Another important consequence of this bug is that the private fuzzy storages should be relearned because of a wrong key used for hashing. To summarize, here is a list of issues for different types of fuzzy storages:

1. For private fuzzy storages that are used **without** `encryption_key` nothing has changed and everything should work as desired
2. For storages with explicit `fuzzy_key` everything should work as desired with the exception of attachments hashes: they no longer use custom `fuzzy_key` for performance and architecture reasons. So it is recommended to relearn such a storage after upgrading to `1.3.3`
3. For storages without explicit `fuzzy_key` but with `encryption_key` the recommended action is to upgrade to `1.3.3` and relearn a storage since all old hashes won't be recognized (there won't be any false positive hits however).


### Rspamd.com fuzzy storage has changed hashing algorithm

Users of `rspamd.com` storage should either use the provided default configuration for `fuzzy_check` plugin or update their custom configuration to include the following line in the rule for `rspamd.com` storage:

~~~ucl
rule "rspamd.com" {
  algorithm = "mumhash";
  # The rest of the configuration
}
~~~

The default rule provided by Rspamd distribution is now the following:

~~~ucl
rule "rspamd.com" {
  algorithm = "mumhash";
  servers = "rspamd.com:11335";
  encryption_key = "icy63itbhhni8bq15ntp5n5symuixf73s1kpjh6skaq4e7nx5fiy";
  symbol = "FUZZY_UNKNOWN";
  mime_types = ["application/*"];
  max_score = 20.0;
  read_only = yes;
  skip_unknown = yes;
  fuzzy_map = {
    FUZZY_DENIED {
      max_score = 20.0;
      flag = 1;
    }
    FUZZY_PROB {
      max_score = 10.0;
      flag = 2;
    }
    FUZZY_WHITE {
      max_score = 2.0;
      flag = 3;
    }
  }
}
~~~

Failure to update hashing algorithm will cause Rspamd not to find any hits in the `rspamd.com` storage.

### Support for Redis maps in the Multimap plugin

There is now [Redis support]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/doc/modules/multimap.html#redis-for-maps) in the Multimap plugin. With this feature you can create maps that can be easily scaled and frequently modified. For example, you could use it for temporary records that work as DNS blacklists but using Redis storage.

### Hyperscan cache important fix

This version contains an important fix for Hyperscan caching inconsistency. After rules change, there were no checks against sanity of regexp ids stored in the cache. In turn, that caused random regexps misdetections and false positive detections. In version `1.3.3` Rspamd checks every single ID using checksum and recompiles the whole cached file when a checksum is invalid.

### SARBL URL black list support has been added to the default configuration

Rspamd now will check URLs using [SARBL](https://sarbl.org) list to detect bad or phishing domains in messages.

### Lua API improvements

There are number of improvements in Lua API shipped with Rspamd:

* `util.get_tld` function has been fixed to find the **longest** possible TLD
* `rspamd_url` now allows initialization of the library and provides a simpler API to parse URLs in strings
* `rspamd_cryptobox` now provides a one step hashing API
* `util.strequal_caseless` function now works as intended
* `rspamd_redis` now returns `nil` for `data` when Redis returns `NIL` (e.g. when a key is not found)
* `rspamd_http` now always performs DNS request even when maximum number of DNS requests for a message has been reached

Prefilters and postfilters registered in Rspamd are now executed in order defined by their priority:

* Prefilters with **higher** priority are executed **first**
* Postfilters with **higher** priority are executed **last**
